Most of this course has been about identifying
efficient solution to problems. But it is
also important to realize that there are some
situations, where no known efficient solutions
exists, and we able to recognize this, so
that we do not fruitlessly try to look for
solutions, where the problem is known to be
hard to solve. So, let us look at some issues
involving intractability.
So, many of the problems that we have seen,
we are trying to search through a number of
possibilities to arrive at some kind of optimum
combination. The actual search space is exponential,
if we are looking for shortest paths, there
are an exponential number of paths, if we
are looking for a minimum cost spanning tree,
there are an exponential number of such spanning
trees to search through.
WeÕre looking for the maximum flow, we have
many different ways of adding and subtracting
flow along edges. So, if you look at all possible
flows, all possible paths, all possible spanning
trees and then choose the optimum, this will
be a Brute force solution which would take
exponential time. When we have a polynomial
time algorithm, we are actually cutting through
the exponentials and in some very drastic
way, reducing our search space from an exponential
one to a polynomial one.
So, it is tempting to believe that if one
just thinks long enough and hard enough, that
any such problems, we will always find such
an efficient short cut, where we can cut through
the exponential space of possibilities and
quickly narrow down the space to a polynomial
number of realistic ones from which the efficient
solution, the actual solution we want will
emerge.
Now, unfortunately this ideal world is not
actually the way the world is. So, there are
many problems, so which efficient algorithm
do not exist or are not known to exist and
an unfortunately, also many of these problems
are extremely important practical problems.
So, to get into this discussion, let us talk
about the problem between, the difference
between generating a solution and checking
a solution. So, supposing a school MathÕs
teacher assigns the following homework, take
a large number which is known to be the product
of two prime numbers and find these two prime
numbers. From the studentÕs point of view
obviously, the problems is to generate the
solution. So, given the large number N, the
student is expected to find two prime numbers
p and q, such that p times q is equal to N.
Now, the student submits or the students submit
their solutions to the teacher for evaluation.
So, the teacher is in much better respective,
the teacher does not have to keep generating
p and q, the teacher has does not even need
to know the answer. The teacher can just take
the answer given by the student, multiply
p times q and determine whether p times q
is equal to N or not.
So, even without knowing the answer or even
if the answer is wrong, the teacher may not
know the right answer, the teacher can decide
whether or not the student as given the correct
answer. So, what the teacher is doing is checking
the solution that the student was trying to
do or generate the solution.
So, this gives us some notion of a checking
algorithm. So, if I have a problem, I can
say that I have a checking algorithm, if for
every instance I can take a solution to that
instance and quickly verify whether or not
that solution is actually a valid one. So,
checking algorithm takes an input for the
problem, a solution which is may be not just
the solution, but solution plus some extra
information, and then it determine whether
or not, this is a valid solutions, if so it
says that the solution is correct and outputs
yes, otherwise it says no.
So, in our example before the factorization
example, the input instance is the number
N to be factorized. The solution that we get
as a candidate to solve the problem is the
pair of primes p and q that the student has
calculated and the checking algorithm involves
verifying that p times q is actually N.
So, in this context, let us look at a very
canonical problem which has a checking algorithm
called Boolean satisfiability. So, we have
some Boolean variables x, y and z. So, Boolean
variables can take values, true or false and
we have a standard operations on Boolean variables,
negation takes a value of true and transit
false and vise verses. So, we write that with
this exclamation mark using some programming
language terminologies, so not x it is used
an exclamation mark x.
Then, we have x or y which is true provided
at least one of them is true, so if either
x is true or y is true or both are true, x
or y is true, we write that with this vertical
bar or pair of vertical bars and use an ampersand
denote AND, x and y is true only if both are
true. So, x must be true and y must be true,
either one of is false, x and y is false.
So, this is the standard Boolean operations
that we know about Boolean variables.
Now, we set up Boolean formulas in a very
special form, we said first construct what
we called are clauses. So, a clause is a big
disjunction, it is x or not y or z and something.
So, what is the inside the disjunction or
either variables or their negations. So, these
are called literals, so literal is either
a variable or a negated variable. So, clause
is read as a disclause x or not y or z dot,
dot, dot or w. So, this is a clause and in
finally, a formula will be a combination of
such clauses connected by AND.
So, C will be some x or y or something, D
will be some z or not y or something and so
on and so each clause will have this structure
of a big disjunction of literals and then
they are combined by an ampersand, so they
are all handled together. So, I need to make
clause C true and I need to make clause D
true and I need to make clause E true and
so on.
So, our goal is to find out whether this given
formula can be made true by assigning suitable
values to x, y and z; all the variables in
the formula. So, this is called a valuation.
Valuation is a function that says x is true,
y is false, z is true and so on, so it fixes
the value of each Boolean variable. Now, having
fixed that I can evaluate, so for example,
if I take x to be true, y to be true and z
to be false, then here for instance in this
clause, x is true so that is enough to make
the whole clause true, y is also true, in
this clause for instance x is true, so this
part is true, x is true.
Here, it says y is true, z is false, so both
of these are actually true and now, here it
says x is false not x, but x is true, so not
x is false, y is true by our evaluations not
y is false, but fortunately z is false, so
not z is true. So, in each of these clauses
at least one of the literals becomes true
under this valuation, so this entire formula
is actually satisfied. Now, if I add this
extra clause here to the same formula, now
it turns out, there is no way to find any
way of assigning true false to x, y, z make
it.
You can check that this particular evaluation
does not work, because if I look at this it
such that x is true, so this does not work
and it says that z is false, so it does not
works. So, z is false, so z is not true, x
is true, so not x is false, so this is false
or false. So, this clause actually valued
false. So, this particular evaluation which
make the first formula true, it does not make
the second formula true.
And in particular no valuation will actually
make it true and that can actually be checked
if you look at these three clauses, this can
be said as that y implies x, what this says
is that if y is true, then x must be true.
And this says that if z is true, then y must
be true and this says that if x is true, then
z must be true, so this more or less says
that x, y and z must all be the same. But
if then x, y and z all the same, then either
one of the first of the last was going to
be false, actually there is no satisfying
assignment. So, our goal is to find out whether
there is a satisfying assignment or not.
So, to generate a solution, of course the
Brute force approach is to try assigning each
of x, y and z; true and false in turn, and
then once we assigned x, y and z to be true,
false; we can evaluated and check if the formula
is true and we try this for every possible
such assignment. If there are N variables,
each of them has two possibilities, clearly
there are 2 to the N, so an exponential number
of possible assignments.
Now, the amazing thing is that in general
no better algorithm is known for this problem,
at the movement as things stand, we do not
know an efficient way to take a formula on
this form and find out, whether it has a satisfying
assignment. However, it is easy to check that
it has an algorithm which can check a solution.
So, if I give you a formula and I claim that
a given valuation is actually a satisfying
assignment, all I have to do, is I plug in
that assignment, like we did for the earlier
case.
I can say oh you say x is true, let me put
true everywhere I see x, you say oh y is false,
let me put false everywhere I see y, and then
evaluate the formula, find out whether the
ANDÕs and ORÕs add upto a true answer or
not. So, it is easy to see that this has the
checking algorithm, but it does not have a
generating algorithm, at least we do not know
of one.
So, in this case, it please turn and other
case is also, sometimes your presentation
of the problem is important. So, we said that
a clause was a disjunction of literals, and
then the formula was a conjunction of clauses,
what would be a reverse says, what would be
say clauses are conjunction of literals. So,
in a clause, I connect everything with AND,
and then I connect the clauses with OR, this
means that I must makes C true or D true or
E true.
Earlier, I had to make C true and D true and
E true, now if I look inside a clause, how
do I make a conjunction like this prove, well
itÕs easy, right? I must make each of this
true and else I make everything true, this
whole AND will fail. So, if I take a clause,
then the settings of the variables inside
the clause force me, it says x must be true,
y must be not y must be true, so y must be
false and z must be true and so on, so I do
not have much choice.
Now, inside a clause, I am might see not y
and then somewhere else I may see y. So, therefore,
such a thing will say I am being asked to
set y true and y false, so this clause cannot
be true, then I move to the next. So, I look
at each clause, I check whether the unique
valuations is this on plausible or feasible,
if it is at null, because I only need to satisfy
one clause, other ways I move to the next
one.
So, in a linear scan from left to right, I
can basically solve this problem, if it is
given to me in this form, whereas in the earlier
form I need, there is no efficient algorithm.
So, clearly the presentation of the problem
is important.
So, let us look at a completely different
problem. So, we have this well known traveling
salesman problem. So, a salesman is supposed
to visit a network of cities and between each
pair of cities, we have a distance. So, we
can think of it is a complete graph, every
city connected to every other city and on
each edge between two cities, there is a weight
indicating the distance or the cost or the
time or some quantity which the salesman has
to use up in order to travel from the one
city to next city.
So, the salesmanÕs goal is to visit every
city on this map. So, the salesman wants to
find the shortest tour that visits each city
exactly once. In a graph theoretic sense what
it means is that they have a simple cycle,
simple cycle means that no nodes repeat, I
do not visit the same vertex twice along this
thing which starts and ends in the same state,
that is why itÕs a cycle a starts and ends
of the same city, same vertex, visit every
vertex in between and of minimum cost.
So, once again, there is no simple way to
write a generative algorithm which will actually
analyze this and find a good solution. So,
now, our question is, is there a checking
solution, is there a checking algorithms.
So, recall that, what a checking algorithm
does is it takes as input, it takes an input
instance and it takes a solution, and then
it says yes or no, this solution works this
solution does not work.
So, now, we have a graph and somebody gives
us a cycle, we can verify that itÕs a cycle.
So, that part is easy, we can even compute
the cost of the cycle, that is also easy,
but how do we know that among all the difference
cycles, this is the least cost. So, it is
not very clear that there is checking algorithm,
because in the end, though we can verify part
of the solution, that it is a cycle, that
is this all the cities and we know it is cost,
we have no way without solving the problem.
Remember the goal over checking algorithm
is not to solve the problem, it is to ask
whether this given solution is correct for
this given instance. So, we may not know how
to solve the problem, like the teacher is
who has assigned the factorization home work,
the teacher does not need know how to factorize,
this not even need to know the factors, the
teacher only needs to know, how to multiply
two potential factors and check whether the
answer is the same as the big number.
Similarly, here we just need to check, whether
the given nodes form a cycle, but unless we
know how to solve the problem, the checking
algorithm cannot figure out whether itÕs
a least cost cycle or not.
So, how do we get around this? So, the solution
in such optimization problem is to convert
them into checking algorithms is to transform
the problem by giving a bound, so I give an
upper bound or a lower bound depending on
out. So, in this case, we will ask weÕll
not just ask if there is a tour, if there
is traveling salesman tour of lowest cost,
we have says is there are tour with cost at
most k. So, we have just given a bound on
the cost, we are not asking for an optimum
tour, we just in only asking for a tour with
does not cost more than K.
Now, we have given a solution, we can check
it, because we can check it is a cycle, and
then we can add up all the edges which form
part of the tour and find out, whether it
adds up to K or less. So, so how does this
help us, because our goal was to find the
shortest tour, what we have said now is that
if I give you an upper bound size a tour,
I can use checking algorithm for yes or no,
but now we can try different case.
So, we have the minimum of value of K is clearly
0 and the maximum value is some upper bound.
What is a good upper bound? Well, we know
that a tour is going to take edges from the
top, if I take all the edges in the graph
and add up all the cost, the total tour cannot
be more than that. So, I have a range of values
possible for the cost of tour from 0 to say
the sum of all the edge weights in the graph.
You might even find a better bound than that,
because obviously, we cannot use all the edge
weights, we can only use N of them to complete
a cycle of size n.
But, this is a very conservative bound, now
what we do is, we do in this range, we do
binary search. So, we first check is there
a tour of whose cost is mid way, if there
is then I will now check below is there a
tour cost half of that. So, by doing a binary
search, we narrow down the thing and finally,
weÕll find that this is the level, where
we have a tour and about that, we have tours
and below that, we do not have tours. So,
this is the minimum cost tour.
So, by using a binary search and an upper
bound, we can take an optimization problem
where weÕre looking for an optimal answer
and transform it into a sequence of checking
problems, which after a logarithmic search
through this space of the bounds will give
me the actual solution or not.
So, here is yet another problem. So, this
is the called the independent set problem.
So, we say that two vertices are independent;
if they are not connected by it is an edge.
So, for example, here you good look at say
1 and 7, then there independent together no
connections. So, may be 6 and 5 are independent,
so we say that two vertices are independent,
if there is an edge.
Now, if I take this set by take 1 and 7, this
is an independent, but if I add 5 to it is
for the instance, now 5 and 7 are connected
by an edge, so these are not independent.
So, an independent set is one in which every
pair is independent. So, 1 and 7 is an independent
set, but 1, 5, 7 is not an independent set,
because 5, 7 is an edge.
So, here for instance, you can check that
3, 4, 5 forms an independent set, because
is no in between 3 and 4, there is no edge
in between 4 and 5, there is no edge in between
3 and 5. So, for example, if you are trying
to say you interpret these nodes as people
and you node edges as knowing each other.
So, supposing you now you want to set up some
kind of a committee, where you want to be
usual that all the committee members have
independent opinions are not influenced by
the facts that they know each other before
that.
Then you can pick up an independent set, an
independent set will produce people, who do
not mutually do not know each other. So, therefore,
when they meet for the first time, hopefully,
if they have neutral opinions about each other
and about the problem that they haveÉ So,
this might be one example of why you want
pick up an independent set. So, the algorithmic
problem is to find the largest independent
set.
So, here we have found an independence set
of size 3, can I do better can I find one
of size 4, maybe, maybe not. So, this my algorithmic
problem, given a graph what is the largest
independent set, that I can find in it. As
we saw before, this is a problem where we
have to get an answer. So, if somebody tells
me 3, 4, 5 is a maximum independent set, I
can verify easily the 3, 4, 5 reason independence
set, but I cannot necessarily verify that,
if there is no larger set.
This is like that traveling salesman problem,
when I can verify that the tour to given to
me is a simple cycle, but I may not be able
to verify that the cost of the tour is the
best among all such. So, once again, if you
want to set up which checking version the
problem, we will set up off, will say is there
an independent set of size K. So, we are trying
to find the largest one, so you will say at
least size K. So, if I at least size 3 and
this produce of this, I will verify it at
least size 3.
And at least size 4 and this is my witness
and this is my solution, I will say no. So,
independent set again like traveling salesmen
and Boolean satisfiability, we do not know
of a good generative solution. But by using
this bounded version where we provide us a
number quantities, we are trying to estimate
we can produces checking versions.
So, a related looking problem, relative problem
to this is called vertex cover, we say that
a node you covers every edge that is instance.
So, for example, if I take this node, then
it covers these three, these four edges, because
all these edges start at 2. So, now, vertex
cover is something that covers all the edges.
So, for instance I take a 2 cover those edges,
now these edges are not there, maybe I take
3 to cover it. So, I take 3 in this covers,
these edges have a still have some missing
edges, so maybe I pickup 7, which is 7 covers
these three edges.
So, now I have found a collection of 1, 2,
3 vertices which cover all the edges in this
graph. So, now, what we want to do is find
the smallest vertex cover in a given graph,
and again because we do not know how to do
smallest in general, we will say that, we
will take any vertex cover which is at most
size K we are looking for the smallest one.
So, it is like the traveling salesmen, we
are looking for the shortest tour, so it say
is there a tour of less than or equal to said
me cost, so is there a vertex cover less then
equal to a certain cost. So, these two problem
look connected and in fact they are. So, here
for example, we have a vertex cover of size
4, which is indicated in green.
So, the connection is that U is an independent
sets of size K, if and only if it is complementÕs
it vertex cover of size N minus K. So, in
our case U 3, 4, 5 was a vertex independent
set of size 3, then itÕs complement must
be a vertex cover of size N minus K. So, if
I could solve the vertex cover problem for
a certain size, I can solve the independence
set problem for N minus K. So, I can convert
one to the other and the proof of this very
easy.
So, supposing I know that U is an independent
set. U is an independent set, then no edge
is within U. So, if I take any edge U V, then
if one end is inside U, the other end must
be outside U or both end points are outside.
So, therefore, if I take any edge at least
one of it is end points lives in V minus U.
So, V minus U covers all the edges, so therefore,
V minus U is a vertex cover.
And of course, given that this has K vertices,
the other must have N minus K vertices, conversely
supposing I assume that V minus U is a vertex
cover, then every edge starts from there.
If every edge starts from there, one of itÕs
ends points is there. So, I cannot have an
end which is entirely within the complement,
because if have an edge which is like this,
then this is an edge which is not covered
by vertex cover. So, they cannot be any edges
with in U, therefore, U is an independence
set.
And once again, the sizes are guaranteed,
because their complementary search a vertices.
So, this says that independent set reduces
to vertex cover with the complementary size,
this is the bounded vertex version and vertex
cover reduces to independence set. So, they
reduce to each other.
So, when we introduce reducibility in the
contest of liner programming and network floors
we said that one aim is to transfer efficient
solution from B to A. So, when I reduce A
to B, if B is an efficient, then A is efficient.
But in this context, what we are trying to
say is that this is not known to be an efficient,
then this also is not known to be efficient.
So, since independently we believe that independent
set is not efficient then because it reduces
to vertex cover, vertex cover is also likely
to be not efficient and vice versa. So, it
turns out that that many pairs of checkable
problems or such inter reducible problem,
either directly are you may find a cycle or
things A reduce to B, B reduce to C and C
reduces back to A.
So, in that sense, all of them are equally
easy or equally hard and since, we tend to
believe that nobody has solved any of them
yet, if they must all be hard, this gives
to the believe that there is large group of
problems which are actually practical in terms
of their usefulness. But not known to be efficiently
solvable in terms of our notions of algorithmic
efficiency. So, we will look at this with
a little more detail in our last lecture.